The novel "451 degrees Fahrenheit" tells about a totalitarian society in which literature is banned, and firefighters must burn all the banned books that they find, moreover, along with the homes of the owners. In this case, the owners of the books are subject to arrest, one of them is even sent to a lunatic asylum. The author portrayed people who have lost touch with each other, with nature, with the intellectual heritage of mankind. People rush to and from work, never talking about what they think or feel, ranting only about meaningless and empty things, admiring only material values. At home, they surround themselves with interactive televisionprojected directly onto the walls (in which kinescopes are built), and fill their free time with watching television, endless and goofy serials. However, the “prosperous”, at first glance, the state is on the verge of an all-out destructive war, which is nevertheless destined to begin at the end of the work.

The protagonist of the novel, “fireman” Guy Montag (the word fireman is translated as a fireman, which does not reflect all the meanings laid down in it by the author; this word can mean “stoker”, “stoker”, etc. [2]), meets a seventeen-year-old girl Clarissa MacLellan and begins to understand that a different life is possible. Clarissa is considered strange because of her fascination with nature, her desire to talk about feelings and thoughts and just live. Montag loves his job, but secretly takes books from several houses that he was supposed to burn. The death of Clarissa, who is hit by a car, a meeting with a woman who refuses to leave her own house, filled with kerosene, and herself strikes a match on the railing and burns herself along with books, increases Guy's internal discord. Later, Guy will remember the last name "Ridley", which sounds in the phrase of that woman: "Be courageous, Ridley. By the grace of God, we will light such a candle in England today, which, I believe, they will never put out ”(Montag’s boss, Firemaster Beatty, explains to Montag the words of an old woman:“ A man namedLatimer said this to a man named Nicholas Ridley when they were burned at the stake for heresy at Oxford on October 16, 1555.") Montag decides to quit his job after what happened. He pretends to be sick for a day.

BrandmasterBeatty gives Guy a day to recover, saying that every firefighter has moments like this in his life. But after that, he hints to him that Montag should bring the book that Montag stole from the burnt woman and hid under the pillow to burn it. Beatty states that the point of destroying books is to make everyone happy. He explains to Montag that without books there will be no conflicting thoughts and theories, and no one will stand out, become smarter than a neighbor. And with books, “who knows who might be the target of a well-read person?” The life of the citizens of this society is absolutely free from negative emotions - they only do what they have fun. Even the death of a person has been "simplified" - now the corpses of the dead are cremated literally in five minutes, so as not to disturb anyone. Montag tries to sort out his thoughts asks his wife Mildred to help him with this, begins to get books from the hiding place behind the ventilation grill and read excerpts from them, but his wife does not understand him, she is horrified by what is happening, screaming that he will destroy them. She pulls away from him, putting on her headphones, chatting with her TV "relatives" and with the neighbors.

Guy reminisces about old Faber, whom he met a year ago in the park. The old man hid something in the left pocket of his coat at the sight of Montag, jumped up as if he wanted to run away, but Montag stopped him, then started talking about the weather, etc. The old man was frightened at first, but then admitted that he was a former professor of English, grew bolder, became more talkative and recited several poems by heart. Both avoided mentioning that Montag was a firefighter in conversation. Faber wrote down his address for him on a piece of paper: "For your filing cabinet," the old man said, "in case you want to be angry with me." Guy finds the ex-professor's card by opening the bedroom closet in a drawer labeled "Investigations Upcoming" and calls Faber. He comes to his house with the Bible and asks to listen to him, to teach him to understand what he reads. Faber gives Montag a miniature hearing aid-like transceiver for emergency communications. They agree that they will act together - make copies of books with the help of a printer (Faber's acquaintance), wait for a war that will destroy the current order of things, and hope that then, in the ensuing silence, their whispers will be heard.

Guy returns to work with a hearing pod in his ear. Mildred, and before that two neighbors, Miss Clara Phelps and Mrs. Bowels, to whom, angry because of their empty chatter, he read the verse "Dover's Shore", report that Montag keeps books at home. Beatty sets things up so that Guy comes to the call to burn down his own house. He is followed by an electric dog, whom Montag was always afraid of - he was sure that the dog was opposed to him. On Beatty's instructions, Guy burns down his own house, and then, with a jet of flame from a flamethrower, kills Beatty, who deliberately provoked him to do this, stuns two firefighters and burns an electric dog. But the electric dog still manages to hit him with a procaine needle, one of Guy's legs goes numb, and this slows down his movement. Sirens are heard everywhere, police cars are chasing him,

Guy is nearly hit by a car and is saved by a fall. “The driver realized in time, didn’t even realize, but felt that a car racing at full speed, having bumped into a lying body, would inevitably roll over and throw everyone out.” So at the last second the car took a sharp turn and went around Montag. Guy picks up the books and tosses them into the house of Miss Black and her fireman husband. Then he goes to the house of the former professor. There, the owner of the house turns on the TV, and they learn about the chase broadcast from the air and that a new electric dog has been delivered to hunt down the criminal. Montag advises his ally to burn the bedspread, throw a chair into the stove, wipe the furniture, all doorknobs with alcohol, burn the rug in the hallway - destroy all things and objects that he touched; Faber should turn on the ventilation at full capacity in all rooms,naphthalene everything that is in the house, turn on the watering installations in the garden with might and main, wash the paths with hoses - in order to interrupt Guy's trail. They arrange to meet in one to two weeks in St. Louis , on the condition that they stay alive. Montag must write to the former professor on demand at the address of the main post office. There Faber will go to visit the printer. Guy takes a suitcase with his colleague's old things and leaves his house.

Montag makes his way to the river, changes into his clothes, enters the water, the current picks him up and takes him into the darkness. The electric dog loses his trail by the river. When Guy comes out of the water, he enters the forest, finds a railway track leading from the city inland, sees a fire in the distance and goes to its light. There he meets a group of people who treat him very friendly. Among them: Granger, who wrote a book called The Fingers of One Hand. Correct relationship between the individual and society”; Fred Clement, former Chair of Thomas Hardy at the University of Cambridge; Dr. Simmons of the University of California, an expert on the work of José Ortega y Gasset; Professor West, many years ago at Columbia University, who made a considerable contribution to the science of ethics, now ancient and forgotten; The Reverend Father Padover, he preached a few sermons thirty years ago and lost a parishioner because of his way of thinking in one week. They have a portable TV, so they know Guy in absentia. He is given a vial of colorless liquid to drink to change the smell of sweat. In half an hour, according to Granger, Guy will smell like two completely different people. On TV, they watch a staged death of Montag - instead of him, an electric dog kills a random passerby with a procaine needle.

It is further revealed that Guy's new acquaintances are part of a community that keeps lines of literary works in their heads until tyranny is destroyed and literary culture is recreated (they are afraid to keep printed books, as they can betray the location of the rebels). Each of them remembers by heart a literary work. Montag, who remembers several passages from the Bible books - Ecclesiastes and Revelation of John the Evangelist , joins their community. In an instant, the war begins and ends, and a group of professors, together with Guy, watches from afar the death of the city as a result of an atomic bombing. At this moment, Montag, who has thrown himself flat on the ground, feels (or imagines) that he is seeing Mildred's death. Faber escapes death, he is at this time in the bus, following from one city to another. After the disaster, new like-minded people set off on a journey, and each thinks of his own. “Later, when the sun rises high and warms them with its warmth, they will begin to talk <...> Montag felt that words were awakening and coming to life in him. What will he say when his turn comes? <…> “And on either side of the river, the tree of life, bearing twelve fruits, yielding every month its fruit and the leaves of the tree for the healing of the nations…” Yes, thought Montag, that's what I'll tell them at noon. At noon… When we get to the city.”